[Music]
I had the opportunity today to engage in
a long awaited discussion Dr Richard
Dawkins and Alex o coner and we took the
opportunity to explore things we agree
about and things we disagree about in a
manner that I think was very productive
join us for
[Music]
that you said that you were a cultural
Christian but what did you mean by that
virtually nothing Dr Peterson you're
drunk on symbols what I care about is
the truth value I see no no truth value
in the claims of Christianity the Virgin
birth the resurrection do you believe in
any of those from a metaphorical
perspective any culture that doesn't
hold the image of the woman and infant
sacred dies well let's go back to what
you said earlier which I was very
interested in you implied there's no
difference between whether the text is
divinely inspired or whether it evolved
well it's the same thing if it's
fundamentally reflective of the logos or
order and I think it is I think that
Jordan prioritizes myth and I prioritize
fact I'm not interested in Dragons I'm
interested in real in reality but my
sense is that those two Pathways have to
unify now it's not like I know how to
rectify that do you think that that is
something that is is worth exploring
further is that is that's very
interesting
[Music]
yes I think our first point of contact
in the spirit of finding those
overlapping Circles of interests between
you two will be the similarities if
there are any between the concept of a
meme and the concept of an archetype so
Professor Dawkins perhaps you can begin
by telling us what is a meme a meme is a
virus of the mind so it's something that
spreads because it spreads because it
spreads it's something that spreads by
imitation as I understand it an
archetype is quite different from that
because an archetype is something which
all humans have um as a virtue of Being
Human something that's built in so it's
not something that spreads as an
epidemic it's something that we all have
any way now I suppose that it could turn
into a meme but I I would think it would
be mudding the waters to even say that
there's something very much in common
between an archetype and a meme memes
are not embedded into the psychology of
people as no they arise they're things
like the backwards baseball hat which is
not an archetype I mean it's it's
something that that becomes fashionable
and spreads as an epidemic around the
population which is very different from
an archetype which is sort of built in
yes I've heard you in the past Dr
Peterson say that a meme is very similar
if not almost identical to an archetype
almost as if you kept pushing the idea
of what a meme is you might end up with
an archetype that well I think maybe the
the appropriate way of tying the two I
ideas together given what Dr Dawkins
just said is the is to notice the fact
that something spreads because it
catches right and so things catch
because they have an emotional resonance
and so they attract people's interest
and so they attract them in an
exploratory manner that'd be one way of
thinking about it that would be
attraction on the positive emotion side
or they attract them on the negative
emotion side and so that would Loop the
idea of the catchiness of a idea a meme
let's say with the more underlying
motivational structures and as the idea
is more related to the action of
underlying biological motivational
structures it it becomes more and more
expression of something that's
instinctual and archetypal like Yung
defined an archetype essentially as
something like the the manifestation of
an instinct in image and then also in
Behavior so the deepest level is
something like the Instinct and that
would be motivational or emotional drive
and then there's a manifestation of that
in imagination and behavior and it's
more culturally constructed there and
you could also imagine that there are
depths of these ideas the the baseball
half
idea for example that would be something
that's manifesting itself at a fairly
shallow level but there's a reason that
the backwards baseball hat caught on you
know it speaks of the moment for
whatever reason and and it's linked to
the
biology through the fact that it
captures interest for some reason so
perhaps something like uh the archetype
being a more fundamental psychological
concept that memes can then play upon
the backwards cap hatches on well that
seems in plausible to me but the but the
idea that the archetype could be a
reason why some memes spread that that
seems to me to be plausible if you
believe in archetypes at all yeah but
you prefer to think of memes or you do
think of memes as you refer to them as a
virus yes doesn't have to have a netive
it's spreadability which is which is a
Salient point and if chiming in with an
archetype is something is some a reason
why they might spread then I could go
with that yeah and presumably archetypes
don't act in the same way they don't
spread through cultures they don't sort
of grow up and die in individual
Generations they're much more
foundational than
that I think you have to think about it
hierarchically know that there are
there's something in in in the structure
that that would make it self manifest as
an archetype there's something that's
foundational and deep that wouldn't
change
over wouldn't change any faster in a
sense than the species itself changes
but then there would be efflorescences
of that idea that would be less
permanent as they as they were more
attuned to the specifics of the time
so and that's not saying anything
different really than saying that there
are ideas that make themselves manifest
at different levels of depth which is
also a complex thing like it's not a
it's not that easy to specify what makes
an idea deep which makes it more
archetypal and what makes it transient
and trivial there's a relationship
between such ideas there's no idea so
trivial that it doesn't touch the depths
because no one would care about it right
so but but but archetypal ideas do have
that capacity to spread virally and to
rise and fall you see that I think you
see that in the history of religious
ideas know that religious ideas are very
can be very catching because otherwise
they wouldn't spread now they do there's
variation in them like there is in
languages but they also there's also
something that's core that makes them
ident if iable let's say as religious
ideas rather than as any other sort of
idea I mean one of the things I was
really interested about I sent you an
email at one time asking you if you had
read Rich eliad especially the sacred
and the profane but he also has a three
book series called a history of
religious ideas and I really like a
history of religious ideas it's a great
book and one of the things it does is
analyze a particular widespread
religious Motif which is the battle
between the Gods in heaven you see this
idea in many many cultures and each God
is the expression of a motive perception
or a motive being and what you see
happening in multitude of cultures is
that there are many many ways of seeing
the world and acting in it that
are metamorphous metamorphosed into
something Divine and as cultures mingle
and
mix their their gods compete in the
space of the imagination and something
like a hierarchy forms that's the
emergence of something like monotheism
and the associate so we've been talking
a little bit about the concept of a meme
I think it's it would be strange to be
suspicious of the idea that memes are a
thing that do exist and transmit but
there might be more room for suspicion
about this concept of the archetype I
was wondering Professor Dawkins what you
think about the concept of archetypes in
general well for example if we take the
idea of the of the Gods competing with
each other um that I take it is a is a
is a proper archetype because it's it's
it's present in all in all cultures I
presume you mean is something that's
built in genetically ultimately I
suppose that that there something about
our brains makes different cultures
invent the same kinds of religious uh
symbols and things like a battle between
Gods is one that's one it it's and um
there might be others it's not that
convincing I mean such an obvious thing
because we have human battles and
therefore an idea of battles between
Gods would not be that implausible so it
it doesn't strike me as a very
penetrating observation well I think the
thing that's interesting about it the
thing that's been interesting to me
about it is to is to start to understand
the nature of the universal themes and
how they're expressed in stories I mean
one of the things I wanted to explore
with you because I think this is an idea
that's at the core of the cultural
conflict is the postmodern types seem to
have stumbled onto something which I
actually think is true and they're not
the only discipline that's come to this
realization because you can see it
emerging in neuroscience and in in uh in
Ai and in robotics as well that we see
the world of facts through something
that when described is a story because
we have to prioritize our perceptions we
have to prioritize facts and as far as I
can tell a story is a verbal account of
how of how our perceptions and the facts
that we encounter are prioritized so for
example when you go see a movie movie
has a hero and what the writers do is
they show you how the hero prioritizes
his perceptions what he attends to and
how he acts and you derive from that the
story of his life and his ethic and the
the the idea that we have a story that
we have to organize our
Perceptions in priority and that the
description of that organization is a
story that's a very revolutionary idea
and I think the postmodernists got that
right and I think that's why we have a
culture war going on at least in part is
because
the idea that we see the world through a
story or that a story is a description
of the structure through which we see
the world I think that's accurate
because we have to prioritize our
perceptions so that's a tricky problem
well I would prioritize my perceptions
like this the fact that I care about are
the fact that are true and have evidence
going for them and I'm not that
interested in symbols um I think Dr
Peterson you're drunk on symbols yes you
mentioned i' i' I've heard your I've
heard that comment yeah yes um I mean
for example I've I've um I I counted up
in your book um we who wrestle with God
the number of references to
Cain um there are 356 references to Cain
in the in the book and 20 references to
the descendants of Cain um you're
obsessed with Cain um because Cain is
symbolic of uh evil um all the evil in
the world you you more or less blame
Cain for and
um this is Kan I mean you you don't
believe Kan actually existed I
presume since I joined forces with the
dailywire plus we've built a
comprehensive collection of Premium
content get the entire collection of
mastering life strengthen your
relationship with my series marriage in
the series on masculinity discover your
purpose Envision and Destiny develop a
vision for your own life you need to do
that my new series negotiation offers
practical steps to help you close a deal
where both sides walk away with a win
we're also offering a three-part series
on success how to strengthen your family
and to strengthen your relationships and
to aim up people are struggling with
depression and anxiety you walk through
all of that how do you cope with it
what's the best pathway forward in
addition we've explored biblical
writings and their cultural influence
our new 10-part series on the gospels
delineates the accounts of the New
Testament writings and finally join me
on a journey through time foundations of
the West the work I'm doing with the
daily wire brings the spirit of
Adventure forward join us on daily wire
plus
today well I think of Kan as
well do you believe Kan existed I think
the pattern that Cain represents is an
eternal pattern and so it's a higher
level of existence that's different I I
I realize that there arec types who
exist and they're well yeah they are
cane types Kan himself I mean you you
give the game away where you say in your
book Cain and Abel were the first humans
to be born in the natural way now that
that betrays you as as as it were
pretending you think they really existed
because you wouldn't have said they were
born in a natural way unless you were
muddling up facts with symbols there
because you don't think that that Cain
and abble existed well I don't what do I
think about Cain and Abel I I said I
think the pattern that they repres
always exists always
exists different matter a pattern that
they represent the the conflict between
Brothers the Rivalry Between Brothers
this is a fundamental pattern which
which yes it's something that that's
there but I care about facts I mean did
they exist or did they not exist well I
can imagine a situation where when the
story was originated that it referred to
two actual Brothers but as the stories
propagated across time as they mutate as
they adapt let's say to the to the
structure of human memory they deepen
and they become broader and so then they
become emblematic not only of the
pattern of conflict that might
characterize the original two brothers
that the story was about but about the
conflict between Brothers as such and
then the more fundamental levels of
conflict that exist within human beings
which is what you see in more
sophisticated literature it's like the
biblical accounts speak of fact in a
factual manner upon occasion but the
biblical accounts also speak poetically
and metaphorically and allegorically and
people who are sophisticated in biblical
analysis have known this for centuries
the bibl biblical liter interests
generally suffer from the problem that
they don't even know what it means to be
literalist there's lots of
unsophisticated ways of approaching a
text okay let's see what Professor
Dawkin thinks about that well I I I
suppose I'm a literalist I mean and and
you give the game away when you when you
say Kane and Abel the first humans to be
born in a natural way well I'm speaking
allegorically there within the confines
of the text I mean what I meant by that
was that the way the story lays itself
out is that Adam and Eve are created by
God and so they're they're they're not
they're not they don't they're not
emblematic of the pattern of human
beings that exist in Fallen history
within the confines of the text the
first two people who are genuine who
aren't creations of the Divine arcan
enable and so for me they emblem atic of
the patterns of conflict that rip people
apart in the world of history in the
world of normal history Professor
Dawkins I know you take particular
umbrage with that statement that Kan and
abble were the first normally born uh
human beings but I think if I understand
Dr Peterson correctly there are things
that can be sort of true within a story
it's true that Sherlock Holmes lives at
221B Baker Street and as far as I
understand that's maybe what you mean by
uh the the truth in the matter of of
Cain and Abel being the first naturally
born internal well in the context of the
story they're the first two Spirits or
patterns you could think of patterns of
perception and action yes that that
characterize human existence in the
Fallen World right so they're emblematic
of what happens in history outside of
the whatever is meant by the
pre-existent paradise at the same time
you must know I know this comes up all
of the time when somebody says but did
can and aable really exist and I know
that want to say that the the story
which I think it's a silly question I
think it's like asking whether
raskolnikov existed in crime and
punishment like it's not it's not a
trivial question because you can answer
yes and you can answer no you can say
well there was no such specific person
as raskolnikov but you it's it's not a
helpful question because the reason that
dov's crime and punishment is a
masterpiece is because rascalov was
everywhere in Russia when
dovi wrote Crime and Punishment and so
raskolnikov is hyperreal not not real
but to be clear is that how you feel
about Cain and Abel that that that is to
say an identifiable hyper real Homo
sapiens called Cain it's Mur in a sense
it's irrelevant to me because it even if
they were real like we don't know
anything about them
asig even if they weren't real of course
they weren't real well like I said it
could have been the case that where when
the story originated
way back when it originated that the
first people that were described by the
first person who generated the seeds of
the Canan aable story we're referring to
actual people but it doesn't matter
because the the the text is being
compressed and modified over a vast span
of time and it's acced all sorts of
meanings that certainly weren't part and
parcel of whatever the original story
was take the point Alex was said making
um within the confines of the story um
dosi was a great writer what makes you
think the writers of Genesis were a
great writer I mean who were they we
don't we know nothing about them well I
think they well I think they were great
writers because I think I understand the
patterning of the stories and what it
points to I I think the idea for example
that Cain and
Abel are emblematic of two opposed
patterns of adaptation to the world is
brilliant it's it's it's almost
brilliant Beyond imagining especially
because the story is so insanely
compressed and it's certainly evident to
me as a clinician that the patterns that
are portrayed in the story of Cain and
Abel play themselves out in the real
world continually and terribly terribly
you think the author of of that story in
Genesis was a literary
genius I think that there's a spirit of
literary genius at work across Millennia
crafting that story so that it has
almost an infinite depth how that
relates to the original author or
sequential authors I don't know because
it's lost in the seeds of time it's lost
in the it's lost in history so the story
evolved you're saying the story like a
meme yes interesting it evolved to match
the Contours of the human
memory that's exactly it is that these
stories that's part of their archetypal
nature like so they have a emotional and
motivational expression but as they
propagate across time they also evolve
so they're maximally memorable and
they're maximally memorable for a
biological reason well that's very
interesting if they really did evolve
over time if you could if you could
actually Trace successive manuscripts
you can't do that I mean there's there's
presumably a couple of Hebrew
manuscripts and and the Greek one and
what do you what do you mean when you
say well I I would say you can see that
in the compilation of the biblical texts
because one of the things that you see
evolved you know you criticized the
biblical text at one point correct me if
I've got this wrong CU I don't want to
get this wrong you said that there isn't
anything in the biblical text that
constitutes let's say uh significant
original discovery which is something
that you'd expect if it was of Divine
Providence let's say Divine Providence
and so and I I think you know I was
thinking about that objection and I
think that one of the uh discoveries
that the text lays bear in in an
insanely brilliant manner is that the
foundation of the community is sacrifice
that that's an appropriate
conceptualization and you can see the
concept of sacrifice evolve across the
biblical texts as their sequenced
chronologically in the what in the
overall story that makes up the biblical
the biblical text the idea of sacrifice
becomes more and more sophisticated it's
more and more elaborated it's more and
more specified it's more and more
embodied there's a obvious progression
in ideas the progression where do you
see that progression in in successive
manuscripts or I don't in in the success
of stories as the story as the text
progresses the way the way a novel
progresses something like sacrifice the
Old Testament sacrifice in the old test
through the entire through New Testament
text is a sacrificial is a sacrificial
story as well the passion story is a
story of sacrifice it ised the
sacrificial Motif recurs continually
through the biblical text and it's
elaborated constantly and okay so the
criticism is the Bible as a text gives
us nothing to indicate that it has
Divine uh or there's nothing that we can
read in it where we think there's no way
this idea could have evolved were it not
uh divinely put into this text that's a
criticism that perhaps made in the past
well I think it's reflective of some of
some order that's so profound and
implicit that there isn't a better way
of describing it than Divine but I don't
really care if we if we look at that
from the bottom up like as a biological
phenomena or is from the top down I
don't think it makes any difference
doesn't make a difference whether it was
divinely inspired or whether it evolved
within human I don't think fundament
look if okay so so let me ask you this
like I think that at bottom truth is
Unified and what that's going to mean
eventually is that the world of value
and the world of fact coincide in some
manner that we don't yet understand and
I think that that Union the fact of that
Union and the the the the fact of that
Union is equivalent to what's being
described as divine order across
Millennia there's no difference now and
here's this is a tricky business because
you either believe that the world of
Truth is Unified in the final analysis
or you don't those are the options and
if it's not unified then it's it's
there's a disunity there's a
contradiction between value and fact or
there's a contradiction well there's a
contradiction between different sets of
values and they can't be brought into
Unity I don't believe that well let's go
back to what you said earlier which I
was very interested in um you implied
there's no difference between whether
the text is divinely inspired or whether
it evolved in progression during a
series of uh manuscripts presumably now
I think that's genuinely interesting but
it's a huge difference it's not the same
thing I mean I it was divinely inspired
or it wasn't well it's the same thing if
it's fundamentally reflective of the and
accurately reflective of the implicit
logos or order and I think it is like
let me explain that a moment like it
took me a long time to understand the
concept of sacrifice in the biblical
text because it seems so anachronistic
and so primitive you know and primitive
and not understandable what are these
people doing offering you know choice
cuts of meat to a god that lives in the
sky something disgusting about it well
it's it's very it's very easy to saiz
but when you start to understand that
perception itself is sacrificial in its
nature and you start to understand that
there's no difference between work and
sacrifice that they're the same thing
and you understand that Community is
predicated on sacrifice then the
emphasis in the text on sacrifice starts
to become something quite market and
remarkable especially because it's
implicit it isn't obvious at all that
the authors of the texts and the editors
who sequenced them actually understood
what it was that they were highlighting
so with regards to the community why is
the community predicated on sacrifice
because it's not about you you the
community every step you take towards
the communitarian means that you
sacrifice something that's local to what
you want here and now right now you have
to give something up you're you're
you're wandering onto something else now
which which is something quite quite
different um the notion of sacrifice as
you say it goes right through the Old
Testament and and the New Testament the
sacrifice of Isaac Ishmael by Abraham
and the sacrifice of Jesus um is the
same idea uh I think it's a very
unpleasant idea by the way um but what
are you actually saying are you saying
that uh Abraham did or did not sacrifice
Isaac are you saying that Jesus really
was Jesus really did die for our sins I
mean do you believe that there are there
are do you believe that as a fact that
that Jesus died for our
sins we have a big election coming up
and there's a lot at stake but here's
something to consider regardless of
who's sitting in the white house or in
Congress the fuse on the economy has
already been lit four years of a
conservative presidency won't be enough
to turn the tide on our $35 trillion in
national debt and if the left wins well
it's like throwing gas on a dumpster
fire now you don't have much control
over the elections outcome but you can
protect your savings by diversifying now
into gold with Help from My Friends at
Birch gold that's right for Millennia
gold has stood firm in the face of
greedy governments economic upheavals
and it can protect you now bir gold will
help you convert in Ira or 401K into an
IRA in physical gold and the best news
is it doesn't cost you a penny out of
pocket think about this in the past four
years the buying power of the US dollar
has declined while the price of gold has
increased 40% coincidence I think not
here's what you need to do text Jordan
to
9898917350 now with bir gold text Jordan
to the number 98898 for your free info
kit today that's Jordan to the number
today there are elements of the texts
that I don't claim to understand what my
experience has been that the more deeply
I Lear I look into these texts the more
I learn that doesn't mean that I can
Proclaim full knowledge of what the
texts Proclaim but I don't think and I
I'm not trying to play a trick here you
know I watched an interview that you did
recently where you were talking I think
it was with Pierce Morgan yeah about the
about the um complexities of trying to
understand this strange realm of quantum
phenomena right and we have a trouble
with Quantum phenomena because at the
micro level things don't act like things
act at the macro level so they escape
our intuitions and one of the things you
said was that although it's perhaps even
impossible for creatures EMB body like
us to get a grip on Quantum phenomena
the strange wave particle duality for
example we have ample evidence that it
works and
[Music]
is deeply mysterious and you're saying
that biblical texts are deeply
mysterious the difference is quantum
physics the predictions you derive from
quantum physics are fulfilled to the
tinth decimal place the tinth decimal
place I I mean I think was Richard fan
says equivalent to predicting the width
of North America to the nearest hair's
breadth that's impressive that that's no
doubt the the mystery there as it were
gains its credentials by its predictions
the of the Bible don't have any
credentials at all as far as I can make
out well I guess the credentials that I
would put you made a statement a couple
of months ago that I found very
interesting and I don't claim to
understand it and I'm not trying to put
you on the spot with it you said that
you were a cultural Christian okay and
so that raised a number of questions in
my mind you know and the first question
was you are changing the subject no I'm
no I'm no I'm not no I don't think so
I may be leaping outside of the topic a
bit to get do cultural Christianity but
I think I I have a list of questions
that you wanted to ask and that is one
of them but I think Professor you
referring to the predictive power and to
the utility of stories okay so that's
actually what I was trying to Z in on
okay so that that was the point well it
seemed to me that your Proclamation that
you were a cultural Christian was a
recognition um and a and a statement
that you had found something in the
culture that had been derived from
Christianity that you had an affinity
with and that there's some reason for
that and one of the things I wanted to
ask you is well what do you think that
Christianity got right that allows you
to make a statement like that I mean I
know I know that there's differences
perhaps in what we both think about the
ultimate veracity of the biblical
stories maybe there isn't differences
like it would take a lot of conversation
figure this out but but what did you
mean by that like what do you think that
Christianity got right that would able
you to make a statement like that
virtually nothing um I meant by that
simp no more than that I'm B brought up
in a Christian culture I went to
Christian Schools I therefore know my
way around the Bible I know my my way
around the book of common prayer I I
know I know the hymns um that's all I I
don't value Christianity as a truth
system at all okay so let me let me ask
you about that because maybe that's true
and perhaps it's not so the first
question is like do you think that there
are any marked differences between
cultural Traditions that would enable
you to rank order them in terms of their
ethical validity okay so for example we
could contrast mainstream UK
Christianity with Islamic fundamentalism
okay so there's a hierarchy there is a
hierarchy hierarchy that points to what
uh well in the case of Islam uh I
dislike any religion which punishes
apostasy with death that throws gay
people of high buildings that practices
clitoridectomy um that that seems to me
to place Islam on a lower level than
Christianity but that's not to say
anything very positive about
Christianity well it might it might be
to say something positive about
Christianity like I think that question
is open because you might ask yourself
what did Christianity get right that led
it away from those particular
presumptions and towards something that
you regard as more ethically appropriate
like this isn't a trivial question it's
a very modest claim uh there's not very
much I mean to to be better than a
religion that throws gay people off high
buildings is not really a
very virtuous achievement I I don't know
I don't know if that's true because if
you look at the barbarism that
characterizes the human past you might
think that any progression whatsoever
towards something approximating mercy
and tolerance is nothing short of a
bloody Miracle well people are pretty
pretty ruthless and so are our
chimpanzee cousins yes they are right so
so we move forward into the light with
great difficulty and the fact that we
can take that for granted now and that
it seems self-evident and deserving of
faint praise it's not so clear to me
that that's that that's a reasonable
proposition okay let's let's Grant the
the faint praise but that has nothing to
do with the truth value and what I care
about is the truth value I see no no
truth value in the claims of
Christianity the Virgin birth the
Resurrection The Miracles do you believe
in any of
those do you believe Jesus was born a
virgin as I said before there are
elements of the text that I don't feel
qualified to comment on my experience
has been that the more like I know from
a metaphorical perspective and from a
Mythic perspective what the story of the
Virgin birth means and I accept that I
know for example that any culture that
doesn't hold image of the woman and
infant sacred
dies and I don't know how that needs to
be expressed in a form though do you
mean that you don't know well let let me
let me ask you about that because truth
this is something I talked with Sam
Harris about too truth as we know is a
tricky business do you think there are
differences in the truth claims between
different writers of
fiction like as DKI more profound than
no well I wouldn't call fiction truth
claims anyway I mean he's a
then on what grounds do we rank order
the the fiction in terms of quality like
doeski is a profound purveyor of fiction
on the philosophical front unbelievably
deep and profound there's something true
about what he's writing about it's it's
nothing to do with the truth the truth
that science is concerned with the truth
of science is the truth that gets us to
the Moon I mean this has nothing to do
with um whether one writer of fiction
has a sort of insight into human nature
that goes without saying I accept that
okay so how do we deal with the notion
that on the on the purely factual side
how do we deal with the idea let's take
the no you you talked about
clitoridectomy let's talk about the
oppression of women yes we make a
scientific case that that's
inappropriate or is it a case that we're
making on some other grounds like I see
in the judeo-christian tradition one of
the earliest pronouncement is that both
men and women carry the image of God
both and that sets a certain tone to
everything that follows and it is a
remarkable Proclamation given its
radical age that both men and women are
carry the carry the image of God and are
to be treated as something with
intrinsic value outside of the domain of
power and politics and it isn't obvious
me it isn't obvious to me having thought
about this a lot how we deal with that
in the pure realm of fact because one of
the facts is if I can oppress you why
the hell shouldn't I yeah my job is to
keep things on track here I think there
are a number of questions question which
Professor Dawkins has asked quite
directly that we still haven't really
heard an answer for okay okay and
Professor Dawkin asking about the Virgin
birth you started talking about metaphor
you started talking about myth I think
anybody listening to this conversation
will understand that maybe a society
that doesn't believe in the vergin birth
won't work maybe that's the predictive
power that you're talking about but I I
think you must understand that when
Professor Dawkins is asking you do you
believe that Jesus was born of a virgin
he means something like a biological
fact and and by the way saying I don't
know or saying you know I'm not
qualified to
comment is an answer to that question
but is that your answer that you that
you don't know I said earlier and and I
I would hold to this is that there are
elements of the text that I don't know
how
to that I'm incapable of fully
accounting for I can't account for for
what the what the fundamental reality
and significance of the notion of the
Resurrection is my my knowledge just
ends sure but I know that whatever
happened whatever happened as a
consequence of the origination and the
promotion of the Christian story was
powerful enough to bring Rome to its
knees and demolish the Pagan Enterprise
so there's some power in that story
that's remarkable let's stick to the
Virgin birth well the Virgin birth
results from a mistranslation of Isaiah
you know that I'm it like these sorts of
questions it's what would you say they
don't they don't strike me
as they're not getting to the point has
a purpose well and look I understand
that there's there's perfect reasons to
debate this I I know that and I know
that your question is more than valid
but it's beside the issue as far as I'm
concerned and and it's it's partly
because well when we started this
conversation I said for example that it
it appears to be the case that a
description of the structure through
which we see the world is a
story we see the world through a story
and so that's a remarkable thing that's
a remarkable Discovery and it's emerged
probably in the last 16 year 60 years in
multiple disciplines because we have to
prioritize our facts and so we
prioritize them according to a
particular pattern and there are
patterns that seem to work and to
propagate themselves properly and to
orient cultures towards life abundant
and there are other patterns the pattern
of Cain for example that lead to
Absolute bloody Devastation and I don't
know exactly how to construe that sort
of truth but we talked about the
oppression of women for example it's
like how do you make a case on Purely
factual grounds that women should be
treated as
equals it's a moral question and I know
that's exactly I I was dealing with a
factual question which is did Jesus have
a father and and you won't answer it
Jesus father and a Heavenly Father like
almost all mythological Heroes so he
wasn't the born of a virgin then so you
so you're saying that Jesus was not born
of a
virgin I I said first of all that I
don't I don't know how to mediate the
fact value dichotomy in that case I said
the same thing about the resurrection
it's not a value it's it's a simple fact
I mean did did did a man have
intercourse with with Mary and produce
Jesus that's that's a factual
question it's not a value
question you must understand what we're
being asked here that that even if you
think that say the author of the
biblical texts intended much more
significance than a simple scientific
analysis of events Professor Dawkins is
interested in scientific truth that's
the kind of truth that he's interested
in and even if you think it's irrelevant
to the point of what the the gospel
authors were getting at that first needs
to be clarified before you can then
begin actually uncovering what the
stories are about so I think Professor
Dawkins is asking from a scientific
perspective and maybe you think that
that scientific approach is wrong but if
you just take it for a moment maybe this
is how we find out that it is wrong
let's take a scientific approach ask the
question did this occur I think that
it's inappropriate to use a question
like that to attempt to under undermine
the validity of the entire what would
you say deep mythological Enterprise we
weren't doing suppose we were asking out
of Interest suppose that we were all
here devout Christians maybe even yian
Christians and we thought this is
interesting over dinner do you think it
really happened like scientifically
would your answer just be I don't know
yes and you wouldn't consider it I mean
it's not an inappropriate question to
ask just on a point of Interest right
did this really occur and I think so
often people are asking you that and and
especially given the context of this
conversation we've we've heard
everything that you're you're saying
about metaphor and myths and but because
the question is still then being asked
did it really happen you know that
that's what you're being asked and the
way you just so easily said yes I wonder
why you struggle to do that in so many
other
circumstances I think because I don't
look at the situation the same the the
way that Dr Dawkins and I look at the
situation are really quite different and
at many many many levels you know so
even on the meme question for example
you know like I know the literature on
the history of religious ideas I see how
these ideas have battled across
Millennia in a manner that is very
reminiscent to me of the same sort of
claim that do Dawkins is putting forward
with regards to meme I know that
literature Dr Dawkins doesn't know that
literature and it's very difficult for
me to communicate from within the
confines of that literature because it's
extensive and deep and and we're de de
with things that we don't understand the
relationship between metaphoric truth
and value predicated truth and factual
truth we don't understand that it's a
big problem we cannot there's no
evidence whatsoever from the scientific
perspective that we can Orient ourself
in the world merely in consequence of
the facts sure and that's a fact and
it's a fact that's been detailed out in
great detail in the last 60 years by
people from a variety of different
disciplines we have to prioritize the
facts that's a value hierarchy there may
be true and false ways of prioritizing
facts but you can't determine the truth
or falsehood of the way that you
prioritize facts by making reference to
the facts that's a big problem okay
let's let's let's talk about that as
perhaps uh a slight detour here because
I think we do need to come back to this
Christ Resurrection thing but Professor
Dawkins would you say that underlying
the scientific scientific Enterprise is
a fundamentally unscientific assumption
you can you can make scientific
investigations in the world but in order
to do so you need to choose what to
prioritize you need to choose what to
investigate you also need to um value
the truth you need to have a value and a
motivation for doing it in the first
place those kinds of things cannot
themselves be scientifically Justified
and so does the scientif scientific
Enterprise have an unscientific
assumption at its space I suppose it
does I mean I I I think we I think that
maybe just be Jordan and Richard but by
the way um um I think that
prioritizes myth and I prioritize fact
and
um I think myth is kind of vaguely
interesting but is not the be on end all
of my life I think it's it's somewhat
secondary to scientific fact sort of
facts that that tell us how old the
universe is how old the world is um the
history of Life the um engineering
achievements of Landing a a a a
spacecraft on on a comet the these are
the things that science can do and as I
said the predictions of quantum theory
to come back to that but predictions of
quantum theory which are verified to a
sufficient number of decimal places that
it's equivalent to predicting the width
of North America to one hair's breadth
now that is however difficult Quantum
theor is to understand that is what you
can get from quantum theory now the
mysteries of the Bible if they are
Mysteries aren't in the same league I
mean they they just don't cut
it attention men who still believe in
the American dream in a world gone mad
the Precision five from Jeremy's Razer
stands as a beacon of Sanity five blades
a superior engineering offer a shave as
unshakable as your faith that the
nation's best days still lie ahead
experience an exceptionally smooth
remarkably close shave and a testate to
the fact that Merit still matters stop
giving your money to woke corporations
that hate you get Jeremy's Razer
precision 5 instead available now at
Jeremy
rers.us
axioms that need to be accepted I don't
want to put put words in your mouth cuz
I want to get this right before the
Scientific Enterprise can begin so I've
tried to think those TRS let me lay out
a couple of them this is partly what
I've done while trying to make the case
for example that you're more of a
Christian than you think you are so for
example I think that the scient
scientific enterpris is motivated by the
aaic presumption that truth tends
towards a Unity I think that it's
predicated on the notion that there is a
logical order that's intrinsic to the
cosmo
that that fundamental order is good that
it's intelligible to human beings and
that discovering that order and aligning
oursel with it makes for life more
abundant I think that the scientific
Enterprise is also predicated on the
idea that the truth will set you free
and I think all of those axioms are
religious and derived from the
judeo-christian tradition and if you
don't believe that you have to account
for why science emerged in Europe and
nowhere else in the entire history of
humanity for examp ex Le and why it's
also why it's under assault from like
all quarters now as that underlying
metaphysic disappear it's like you don't
have you haven't had to be concerned
with the mythological substrate in your
lifetime in some sense because it was
intact and so the universities could
flourish and you had your freedom
remarkable freedom to pursue your
scientific Enterprise wherever you
wanted and people lauded you for it like
that time is that time is threatened and
serious ly so and I think it's partly
because these metaphysical assumptions
have now become questionable and that's
part of the reason that I'm attending to
them it's not because I don't admire the
accuracy of quantum prediction for
example or celebrate what musk is doing
with his capability of sending Rockets
to Mars it's like more power to the
technological Enterprise but you know
what's happening in the universities
it's awful and that's that's not a
scientific problem it's under okay I
agree that okay um I think it's an
interesting question why science emerged
in Europe I mean and I'm not enough of
historian to know it is even possible
that Christianity did have something to
do with that and I I wouldn't
categorically deny that but that
doesn't in any
way increase my trust in the validity of
Christian propositions like the
Resurrection The Virgin birth and
miracles and Jesus is the son of God um
Christianity may have had some kind of
historical
uh facilitating effect that led to the
uh Renaissance that led to to the
Scientific Revolution and and that would
be a very interesting historical
analysis but it doesn't bear upon the
truth of the propositions of the
Christian religion okay let let's
concentrate on the resurrection for a
moment now unfortunately see this is
part of the problem part of the problem
with discussions like this is that the
mode of approach that's taken by the
mythological tends to Circle and wander
like it doesn't because you have to
shine light on the problem from multiple
perspectives that's why it's often
encoded in image for example or in drama
it's not the same tack as a purely
propositional and logical argument so
it's more difficult to make but let me
tell you a story that I believe Bears on
the res Resurrection you tell me what
you think about it because I don't this
is a very difficult story to account for
it's going to take me about 5 minutes
because it's it's complicated but
there's no way around it I don't think
so there's a strange scene in the
gospels where Christ tells his followers
that unless he's lifted up like the
bronze serpent in there can be no hope
for the Redemption of mankind unless
he's lifted up like the bronze serpent
in the desert okay this is a very
strange thing for someone to say so you
need to know what the story of The
Bronze serpent in the desert was and
what it signifies and I think we can
understand it psychologically I really
do believe this and so and the
concordance of that story which was
generated Millennia before with Christ
utterance is something I just cannot
imagine how anyone put those two things
together especially given the lack of
explicit understanding about the
relationship so let let me detail it so
there's a scene in Exodus in The Exodus
story where the Israelites are doing
their usual fractious foolishness and
whining about the fact that they're lost
and bemoaning the loss of their
privileges under the Pharaoh and
complaining about the power dynamics of
their leadership and just generally
being followers of Cain let's say and
God the cruel God that you refer to
decides to send among his suffering
subjects poisonous snakes to bite them
which seems a little over the top you
might say but in response to that I
would say there's no situation so
terrible that some damn fool can't make
it infinitely worse and so that's what
happens to the Israelites so they're
being bitten by these poisonous snakes
and the leaders of the people who've
wandered from God go to Moses and they
sayl we know you've got a pipeline to
God and you know there's a lot of snakes
and they're doing a lot of biting and
maybe you could just ask him to you know
call off the serpents and so Moses who's
not very happy with the Israelites
either decides that he'll go talk to God
and God says something very strange he
doesn't say to hell with the Israelites
more snakes is what they need and he
doesn't say well I produce the snake so
I'll get rid of them he says something
very very peculiar he says have the
Israelites gathered together all their
bronze and make a giant steak and put a
serpent on it a bronze serpent which is
the symbol of healing by the way that
even the Greeks use that is symbol of
asclepius it's a very old symbol very
widespread it's still used by physicians
today and then he says put it up where
the Israelites can see it and if they go
look at it then the Serpent's poison
won't
harm them and I read that and I thought
that's exactly what psychotherapists
discovered as they all converged in the
20th century on the utility of exposure
therapy as Curative and that's the
pharmacon a little of the poison that
hurts you cures you it's the same
principle that's used for vaccines by
the way so what we saw in Psychotherapy
is that if you get people to voluntarily
confront the things that are poisoning
them so to speak that hurt their life
that en them and disgust them they
become braver and more well adapted it
isn't that they become less afraid
because that's been very carefully
tested it's that they learn by watching
themselves expose themselves to the
things that they once fleed from that
there's more to them than they think and
that that generalizes across situations
and it's the same mechanism that
underlies learning as such because
children when they learn put themselves
on the edge of ragged disaster and
that's where they advance and so what
God tells the Israelites essentially in
this dramatic um en Endeavor is that
it's better for them to face the Terrors
that confront them than to have than to
be shielded from the Terrors or for them
to hide from them that there'll be
better people if they face what's right
in front of them even if it's poisonous
and so it's like okay that's pretty damn
interesting and quite remarkable and
then that symbol is used for example by
the Greeks to symbolize medicine as such
but then there's this additional weird
twist which is Christ identifies with
that bronze serpent you think okay
that's a very peculiar thing for anyone
to do what is exactly what exactly does
that mean well so then you might say
well what's the most poisonous thing
that you could possibly face if
you if you dramatized the idea of poison
itself if you wanted people to face what
was worst so that they could become
strongest and the answer to that is the
most unjust possible painful death and
the ultimate confrontation with
malevolence and that's what's dramatized
in the passion story now does that
redeem everyone
maybe maybe maybe the idea is that if we
were courageous enough to look death in
the face unflinchingly and if we spent
our time putting our finger on the
source of evil itself it would revital
us Revitalize ourselves to a degree that
would be unimaginable now as a biologist
you know you think about this too
because I don't remember the philosopher
said it I think it was Whitehead but
that might be wrong we let our ideas die
instead of us right so human beings have
evolved so that we can undergo these
deaths of our own ideas and the
Rejuvenation that emerges in a in
consequence of that that seems to be
something like Evolution towards what
towards the the process of sacrificial
logos as the thing that redeems human
beings and that makes is biologically
unique too cuz we can die in idation and
Imagination instead of dying in
actuality does that fundamentally redeem
us does that Deliver us from death and
evil
maybe like the job isn't done obviously
Richard the story that we've just heard
the Old Testament bronze serpent it's
it's it's rhyming with the with the New
Testament uh Christ depicting himself is
that bronze serpent I think from Jordan
if I may as Richard suggests
um from what I've heard you say before
on this same story there's something
about that um that Harmony between that
New Testament Jesus and that Old
Testament story which is so profound and
so impressive that it's difficult to
imagine it having sort of naive human
authorship what do you make of that
story and of that assertion well it
doesn't impress me I
mean I I don't understand why you would
say that has I don't think Jordan
actually said it had divine
inspiration maybe he did um not divine
inspiration necessarily but more than
just as I say naive human authorship not
like someone just sat at minimum it's a
it's a staggeringly brilliant literary
move especially given the fact that that
relationship hasn't been explicated
before do you think for example if you
were looking in scripture for something
which would identify this as a as a
god-given text maybe you as a scientist
would look for some scientific
information it might have told you the
shape of DNA or something like that but
do you think Jord actually thinks yeah
we can perhaps get on to that but do you
think that a literary uh Brilliance of a
similar kind or a similar intensity that
if the Bible is not a scientific text
you might be looking for something which
some scientific fact which it couldn't
have Otherwise Known is it possible that
some kind of Genius moral move or
literary move could also indicate that
this is this is something more
impressive you more or less ask me
whether what what would impress me and
and and I'm a naive literalist and so I
would say
um if if any Prophet had said something
like um the the world is just one object
in um rotating around the Sun something
like that they never do I mean it's it's
always there some kind of moral lesson
which leaves me cold well why is it that
there is no I mean they say that God
meets you where you're at right and
there are some people who just care
about scientific truth that's that's
what they know that's their profession
why is there not anything in the Bible
for them oh I think the idea that
sacrifice is the basis of the community
is a remarkable uh and scientifically
valid hypothesis I think that it's
precisely akin to the uh what would you
say to the process of cortical
maturation I think they're the same
thing because as we mature we move
farther away from the immediate
gratification of our of our
self-centered emotional and motivational
needs to a ethos of care that brings our
future self into the picture and a wider
and wider array of other people and I
think that's associated with cortical
maturation in fact I think the purpose
of the cortex the purpose a purpose of
the cortex is to bring the Dynamics of
the shortsighted underlying motivational
and emotional systems into the kind of
Harmony that allows for communal
existence and the protection of the
future at the same time that the present
is what would you say cared for and and
attended to that there's a kind of
Harmony there there's also a pattern
there it's not arbitrary at all and I
think we know this biologically is that
the number of ways and I think we
already alluded to this the number of
ways that a society can organize itself
so that each individual can harmonize
their own future with the present and do
that simultaneous with many other people
that's a very there's a very limited
Universe of possibilities there very
limited Universe Richard asked you
before about the difference between a
story or an
idea naturally evolving over the course
of numerous manuscripts and throughout
human history and the idea of it being
divinely inspired and you were seeming
to imply that these are almost
interchangeable Concepts now if that's
the case when you say that this this
Divine Spirit behind the Bible is
actually just the way that it has
evolved throughout the human history
throughout the different manuscripts
that we've had then saying that that is
what Divinity is I think for you may
drag the mundane up into the realm of
divinity but I think for people like
Richard and for many people listening
what it doesn't said is drags the Divine
down to the realm of the mundane very
well put
yes when we think about wildly
successful businesses we often focus on
their great products cool branding and
Brilliant marketing but there's an un
young hero in their success stories the
business behind the business that makes
selling simple for millions of
entrepreneurs that business is Shopify
Shopify is home to the number one
checkout on the planet and here's the
not so secret secret with shopay they
boost conversions up to 50% that means
fewer abandoned carts and more completed
sales our marketing team uses Shopify
every day to sell our merchandise and we
love how easy it is to add more items
ship products and track conversions in
today's market growth-minded businesses
need a Commerce Solution that's just as
flexible and dynamic as they are whether
your customers are browsing your website
scrolling through social media or
wandering into your store Shopify
ensures you're ready to sell ready to
elevate your business upgrade your
business today and get the same checkout
daily wire uses sign up for your $1 per
month trial period at shopify.com jbp
all lowercase go to shopify.com jbp
today to upgrade your selling that's
shopify.com jbp
well I don't know why it would drag the
the Divine down into the realm of the
mundane if we're speaking of something
like a the straight narrow path of
Harmony between
multiple multiple modes of being I don't
think it doesn't make any difference to
me whether it's the material reaching
upward or the Divine descending downward
I don't think there's any difference
between those two things you don't
that's exactly right that's the problem
I don't you don't see the difference
look look look at it this way so for
example in in this conversation you you
you know this to be the case like
there's various ways that this
conversation could go sideways right
seriously like we could either of us
could try to win either of us could try
to demonstrate our intellectual
superiority right each of us could
misrepresent the other or we could both
try and I do think we are in fact trying
that and I think Alex is helping along
with that just just fine we could try to
follow the thread of the exploratory
truth and see if we could get somewhere
now I don't think there is any
difference between that by the way and
what's expressed in the biblical text as
the spirit of the logos that's why we
have dialogue I'm very interested in the
possibility that truths emerge through
evolving manuscripts now that's a very
interesting idea and it's totally
different from divine inspiration and I
I want to pursue it because I don't
believe in divine inspiration but I
would be prepared to believe in evolving
manuscript well I would say well I would
say this is why I had uh set forward the
possibility of taking a look
particularly at merer alata because
that's where you'd find the best work
he's a he's brilliant the history of I
believe that if you study the history of
religious ideas it's a three volume
manuscript or the sacred in the profane
which is probably his single best work
that you'd see profound analogies
between the manner in which you've been
construing the world biologically
including the trains of thought that led
you to the development of the idea of
the meme I really believe that well
analogies is one thing but but is it the
same thing I think it's the same I do I
think look I don't know that's why I'd
like your opinion on it you know well
seriously like it's a complicated
question I've talked
to it's a complicated question most
people don't know both literatures
there's not a lot of people to discuss
this sort of thing with P I talked to
Camille P about this she studied the
work of a man named Eric noyman noyman
wrote a book called the history Origins
and history of Consciousness which is a
work of genius and also another book
called the great mother which is study
of the symbolism of the feminine it's a
great book Pia told me that she believed
that if the academy would have turned to
Eric nyman who's a student of Yung
although the greatest student of Yung
and maybe one who surpassed him that the
entire culture War that's torn the
universities apart wouldn't have
happened people don't know this
literature and it's it's it's let let
let me give you an example this you tell
me what you think about this okay
so I I spent a fair bit of time studying
the psychophysiology of the hypothalamus
okay so the hypothalamus is set up it's
it's got two halves basically one half
deals with fundamental motivated States
hunger thirst defensive aggression
sexuality and so forth and when those
areas are
dominated the biologically relevant goal
is activated and perceptions are
oriented towards that goal okay so now
then you might ask yourself well what
happens if all those biologically
motivated states are satiated and the
answer seems to be is that the other
half of the hypothalamus kicks in and it
mediates exploratory behavior and so the
default structure of the mamalian
nervous system is if satiated or in
doubt
explore and gather new information
there's no difference between that and
hero mythology they are the same thing
they're the same thing the the dragon
fight for example which is the oldest
story we have it's it's coded in the
Mesopotamian mythology the dragon fight
story is explore the dangerous unknown
discover the treasure that revitalizes
the community there's no difference
between that and the science that you
practice they're the same thing what do
you think the same story I don't know
what to make of that I mean
um you say they they're the same story
you you you analogized the the dragon
fight to how many dragons have you
overcome in your life I'm not interested
in Dragons I'm interested in real in
reality okay so let's let's Okay so I I
read a book a while back that described
the described the uh the biological
reality of the dragon say well there's
no such thing as a dragon it's like okay
it's is there such a thing as a predator
of course well that's that's a meta
category what's the category of Predator
bear eagle if you're a primate fire is
fire a predator well it's complicated
because a fire kills you okay so is
there a worse Predator than Serpentine
flying fire breathing reptile is that
not the imagistic equivalent of Predator
so is so in what way if Predator is real
in what way isn't dragon real doesn't
take that much imagination to to see the
identity and then wouldn't the
fundamental task of edible primates be
to figure out how to overcome the dragon
forever I don't know why you say dragon
I mean we have L we have tigers we have
Sabertooth we have why not out there
right but why not abstract because it's
for the same reason that we have the
term Predator like we have the term bear
lion kodo dragon well you make an
amalgamation you saywell the the
relevant set of features is an image
well what's the image Predator as such
what's the image of that the dragon that
never disappears and then there's a
Twist on that which is so cool it's so
interesting because you can imagine
rabbit mythology which would be
something like Predator appears freeze
but that's not the human Story the human
story is predator appears there's a
treasure
somewhere right that's completely that's
a completely different pathway of of
evolutionary significance like the way
that we construe The World Isn't freeze
like Predator it's like oh there's a
predator maybe there's something
valuable lurking in our conflict with it
you know our sticks in our Spears that
enable our fragile bodies to stand up
against the dragons of the world so a
dragon is a pictoral representation of
the abstracted concept of a predator yes
as you say we already have the term
predator and so it be useful in art in
narrative to I mean you can't paint an
abstraction we had the image way before
we had the word sure okay no but but
that's a seriously important thing to
understand but now we have the word we
have the word predator and maybe if we
were doing art maybe if we were all
going to sort of draw a picture or tell
a story we wanted to invent a story to
give our children a good moral message
we might invent this dragon or use this
dragon as well we do always we do it
continually we do it with Harry Potter
we do it with the Lord of the Rings we
do it with the aveng when you say
escaping from but when you say the
biology of a
dragon you must understand how that can
be misleading as to as to the the
Enterprise that you're engaging in
because we're talking here about
narrative we're talking here about art
we're talking here about uh
representations in literature I don't
think the category of dragon is any less
valid than the category of lion any less
biological well it depends on your level
of analysis we have the term Predator
which implies that all predators have
something in common because otherwise we
wouldn't have the term it's like there's
no reason to assume ontological priority
for the category of lion over the
category of Predator like it it depends
on you all that would determine which of
those terms should be used is the
purpose towards which the
conceptualization is being directed if
you want to identify a particular class
of Predator well then lion is a good
term you would say that lions are an
instantiation of this bracket term of
Predator well I would also say would you
therefore say that a lion is an
instantiation of the Brack term of
dragon
yes yes because see because we're not
only fact oriented creatures right it
actually matters to us whether we get
eaten like there's it's one thing to lay
out the nomenclature of the animal
kingdom it's another thing to remember
that Predators can eat you and then it's
another thing and this is very
interesting and it's relevant to that
story of The Bronze serpent it's like
what do we want to teach our children
well to identify ify Predators obviously
well what do we want to teach them more
profoundly What attitude they should
take towards the Eternal fact of the
predator and the attitude they should
take is something like the courage to
voluntarily confront and not to run away
and not to hide and not to freeze and
not to casually demonize but to assume
that in the combat with the Eternal
Predator an eternal treasure might be
found that's exactly what you do whether
you know it or not when you teach a
child to be courageous and that and we
know from the psychological literature
that generalizes and I do think it's
identical with the mechanism of learning
in human beings because kids us we
always learn on the edge you know and in
your own life I know and I don't want to
be presumptuous
but no doubt there have been situations
where you've been battling to have your
ideas distributed even to modify your
own conceptions when you had something
new to learn that's a sacrifice you have
to kill your stupidity so that you can
move forward that's what happens in the
story of Abraham by the way when he
makes sequential sacrifices so in in the
story of Abraham you tell me what you
think about this because it staggered me
when I understood it Abraham is a
protected person he doesn't have to lift
a finger he lives in the Socialist
Utopia he's got everything delivered
hand to mouth he's at home till he's 70
and God comes to him as the voice of
Adventure which is something remarkable
to see and says you leave your zone of
comfort and go out into the world have
your terrible adventure and Abraham says
yes and then a series of cataclysms
occurs around him just like it does in
every adventurous life and every time an
episode concludes he makes a sacrifice
why to get rid of what's stupid and old
about him so that he can progress and
transform and that happens to such a
degree that he gets a new name which
means he's changed so dramatically he's
not even the person he used to be and
that's a consequence of following that
adventurous pathway and that's all coded
in the story I think we just have to
agree that we have different kinds of
minds and you're interested in symbols
and I'm interested in facts I mean let
me let's take Predators I mean Predators
I'm fascinated by predators predators
are the relationship between predators
and prey is an arms race an evolutionary
arms race and whenever you see a really
complicated beautifully designed piece
of biology what um Hume I think uh one
one of hum's characters called things
that ravish in into admiration all who
contemplate them this is almost
certainly the result of an arms race
probably between predators and prey
could be between parasites and and hosts
and so um if we are talking about
adaptations to just the climate W
rhinoceros es grow hair because it's
getting cold that's relatively boring
but when it's an adaptation to a
predator then you get an escalation of
adaptations by prey which are counted by
Predators which are counted by prey
counted by so you get a gradual
escalation now that's interesting that
that that explains why you have animals
that run fast why they have keen sense
organs why they have teeth why they have
sharp teeth why they have have um
Behavior patterns that that either
protect them from predators or if
they're Predators help them to catch
prey the the idea of the arms race is
the thing that grabs me the arms race
between nothing to do with dragons and
so okay so fair enough right and and I
share your appreciation for that
remarkable what what the remarkable
phenomena that emerge in consequence of
that okay so let's take the idea of arms
race all right so we here's how I would
construe what I said in what I think
might be your terms okay all right we
transformed the battle with the Predator
into a meme battle we abstracted it so
that we could figure out how to deal not
with a predator but with the class of
all possible Predators right exactly and
the appropriate way to deal with the
class of all possible Predators is
something like a meta ethic it's a
stance that let let me give you an
example of this we actually know
something about this
psychophysiologically and you can look
at it spiritually or physically and it
doesn't matter so for
example if you take people in
Psychotherapy and they're accidentally
exposed to something they're afraid of
they they have a stress response that's
damaging if it's sustained and they
become more frightened but if you expose
them to exactly the same stressor and
they do it voluntarily they manifest it
an entirely different pattern of
psychophysiological activation okay and
it's it's a it's a it's a stance of
challenge right and not of fear all
right and so what are the things that
you're doing in Psychotherapy when you
get people to expose themselves to you
could say Predators because that's an
accurate way of dealing with it is that
you get them to shift into a mode of
voluntary confrontation instead of pray
like apprehension and Retreat and what
they learn from that is that they can
embody that pattern which I would call a
spirit metaphysically they can embody
that they can practice it it's also the
case there's some evidence that there's
epigenetic consequences of that if you
practice that process of voluntary
confrontation with the terrible unknown
it can catalyze Transformations that
reach all the way down into the
cellular and so we we abstracted the
fight with The Predator into the
imaginal space we play out various
tactics some of them are conserved and
transmitted they adapt themselves to the
structure of human memory and they make
the foundation for our most fundamental
narratives look you know the the the
reference I made to Harry Potter the
reference I made to the Lord of the
Rings and to The Avengers these aren't
casual references you know we spend most
of our computational high-end
computational power generating fictional
worlds where we can portray meme battles
so that everyone can observe them yes so
lion as genetic dragon as mtic Richard
the this concept of the dragon as the
abstracted Predator as a
whole can we talk meaningfully about the
truth in these stories where instead of
talking about a predator or this
predator or that Predator we're talking
about the concept of Predator meme yes
dragon's a meme yeah it's a deep
meme well it it doesn't get me doesn't
impress me I mean I I like reality and
and um um it obviously impresses Jordan
and that's fine it it just we have a
different kind of mind I think well I I
had a comment about that too you know
because I actually think that's true so
there's a psychological trait openness
and openness fractionates into two types
one type of mind is associated with deep
interest in ideas people like that tend
to prefer non-fiction a variant of that
is openness proper and it's associated
with a much deeper orientation towards
the fictional and metaphorical I do
think we have different kinds of minds
but but if we accept the presumption
that there is a Unity of knowledge and I
don't I don't know if that's a
presumption that you entertain or or
presume or share because we could
discuss the alternative my sense is that
those two Pathways have to unify now I
don't think we know how to unify them in
the west that's why there is this
conflict between the scientific and the
religious it's not like I know how to
rectify that the best I can say is this
is what I've learned from studying those
stories but but I would also say because
I've studied your work I do believe that
that idea that you formulated of meme is
exactly the same thing that merer Elliot
is detailing out in his work and I think
the reason that he's not attended to by
the universi is because he's pay in the
history of religious ideas is because
everything he says demolishes the
postmodern marxists demolishes them
which is something that seriously needs
to be done and so I keep think I keep
hoping I think God it would be such a
remarkable thing for Dr Dawkins to know
especially iliad's work although Eric
neyman would be a close second because
it takes the notion of meme which
is what was the recreation of the world
in imaginal space and the transmission
of those Recreations and their potential
battles that's what you specified and it
expands it out into something that ends
across Millennia it's The Logical
extension of your idea and it's not like
people know this because there aren't
people who know both
literatures so this idea of lion as me
lion as
Gene dragon as meme I I I think in so
many words that that it sounds like
that's sort of a summary of what you're
getting at and I get the impression
Richard that you might agree with the
idea that the dragon is an effective
uh mtic abstraction of the concept of
individual Predators but it's just not
that impressive yes it's just not
that impressive be impressive at the
same time that
you are compelled and interested by the
idea of meme I mean let let me ask you a
psychological question if you don't mind
you're obviously welcome not to answer
it but there's a reason that the idea of
meme gripped you and there's a reason
it's spread it's because you put your
finger on something so can I can I ask
you how that idea emerged and why it
attracted you as a darwinian I'm
interested in the process of natural
selection natural selection is the
differential survival of replicating
entities DNA is a very excellent
replicating entity which is whose
replication and selection has given rise
to the whole of life on Earth I wanted
to make the point that DNA is not the
only possible replication you could
imagine uh there might be on other there
probably is on other planets um a
different kind of replicator not DNA and
then I thought maybe we don't have to go
to other planets maybe there's another
replicator staring Us in the face the
virus of the mind um something that
spreads not by DNA replication but by
imitation from mind to mind so it could
be a fashion in clothes it could be a
musical sty it could be an accent a
speech accent it could be um
a a children's game that spread through
school all all these things are
replicators which spread by a non-
gentic means and might therefore
potentially be the basis for a form of
darwinian selection yep that darwinian
selection would be
popularity uh the the spreadability of
an idea the longevity of an idea yes
vity of an of an idea the spread the
spreadability the Fidelity of it of the
idea um how about the grip of Motivation
by the idea like would you expect okay
that that's that's a possibility uh and
I would even concede that that an an
archetype might be a one way in which
certain memes might spread more than
others it might be compatible with a
with a with a with a Yan archetype so
that that's my answer to the to the
question it was coming at it as a
darwinian and wanting to make the point
that DNA probably having spent the whole
rest of the book stressing the gene as
the unit of selection I want to make the
point that it may not be the only one
okay okay so so that's what I understood
from your work so it is on that grounds
that I saw the concordance between what
you were doing and what eliotti was
doing in his investigation into the
spread of religious ideas I like what
you described is what I understood okay
so let let me ask you let me ask you
another question about that okay so
could you imagine a scenario where a
meme had sufficient functional adaptive
significance so that the individuals who
acted it out gained a reproductive Edge
yes okay so then you could imagine a
situation where there was I think I've
got this right a Baldwin effect between
the meme and the genome okay so then
could you imagine effect where the
heroic Hunters of the past who decided
to cease acting like prey animals maybe
when they got rocks or
sticks were acting under the impulse
that facing down the Predator was the
appropriate strategy because I was
thinking about this reproductively like
you know that women are hypergamous they
like men cross culturally about four
years older than they are the most
fundamental female pornographic fantasy
involves vampires werewolves Pirates
surgeons and billionaires dominant men
who are capable of standing up to
Predators who can be brought into an
individual relationship okay so that's
that's the fundamental reproductive
Story meme that seems to drive women
it's allied with the hero myth there
there there are the the different
variants of the same story the different
sexual variants of the same story and it
seems to me it's not unreasonable to
note that that's the fundamental story
of humanity and so I don't understand
why you're not impressed by that talking
about the Baldwin effect and and
suddenly we got into women what what
women like I mean well the men who act
out the hero of meme are much more
likely to reproduce it's an example but
but perhaps we need to explain what the
B I was going to say that totally help
yes that would be useful okay um it it
was suggested by Baldwin um I think in
the late 19th century
uh it's a kind of genetic assimilation
of a cultural or a learned idea so the
idea is that certain animals learn
things learn a clever trick it might be
nut cracking by chimpanzees for example
or potato washing by Japanese maacs or
opening milk bottles by English tits um
and they perhaps it perhaps spread as
mimetically as an epidemic of of of
copying and that that's known to have
happened with the with the blue tits and
great tits in Britain now C certain
individuals are likely to learn it
faster than others and there may be
genetic variation in the speed with
which they learn it and as the
generations go by natural selection
would have favored speed of learning the
new
trick and eventually they would have
learned the new trick so fast they
didn't need to learn it at all it
becomes genetically aimilar ated into
the genome that that's the Ballwin
effect okay that I would say that that's
essentially the same pattern of
archetype Evolution that's implicit in
the yian theoretic well that's very
interesting because that's that suggests
that that yian archetypes might be
genetically assimilated via the Baldwin
effect that's a fascinating idea yes yes
yes yes yes okay so now I know we're
coming to the end of our time soon
anyway it's it's nice to end on a on a
shared point of Interest which is the
Baldwin effect and the archetypes
potential origin in in the Baldwin
effect do you think that that is
something that is is worth exploring
further is that is that something that
we can
crucial well it speaks of the potential
relationship between the spread of memes
and the alteration of of the genetic
process by SEL by I would say it
probably happens fastest by sexual
selection so what right so imagine that
imagine that a M okay so imagine a meme
that a meme develops a
representation imaginal and the people
who embodied are more effective in
dealing with predators and then imagine
that there's a concordance between that
and the attractiveness of those males to
women seems highly probable well then
you can see that that because sexual
selection is a pretty rapid mechanism
that that Baldwin effect could get SP I
totally agree with that I've even
suggested actually slightly way out
suggestion that the habit of standing on
our hind legs might have been sexually
selected and then genetically
assimilated bya the BN effect um
chimpunes do sometimes walk on their
hind legs now if for memetic reasons
that was sexually attractive in our in
our
ancestors uh so it spread as an as an
epidemic of of of sexual display then
natural selection could have savored
those individuals who were best at
standing on their hind legs Genetically
speaking and then would become
genetically assimilated this sexually
selected mimetic effect could have been
genetically assimilated and given rise
to the genetic tendency to to walk on
our hind legs so so I remember what I
was I was going to ask you about this so
imagine you have a situation in the
biblical narratives where the idea of
sacrifice is dramatized and ritualized
so it's acted out it's not exactly
understood it's dramatized and acted out
well there's a I believe there's a
concordance between the probability that
that sacrifice would be offered and the
ability of someone to forego
gratification or to work towards a
future end they're the same thing and
the ability to forego gratification
which is associated with uh cortical
development is a great predictor of
future success let's say future because
we know for example that trait
conscientiousness which is something
like the ability to delay gratification
is the best predictor that isn't
cognitive of long-term future success
the ability to sacrifice the present for
the future is a Hallmark of a strategy
of adaptation that's going to propagate
down the generations that's interesting
as a Canadian you probably know about
the Potlatch phenomenon yes where so a
great sacrifice is is a social display
um destruction of one's own property as
a which which is a form of sacrifice
destruction of one's own property is a a
mark of prestige right well it indicates
your it indicates at know those
communities it indicates two things your
willingness to distribute generously to
the community because you're a big man
if you can do that but
also your faith in the process by which
that wealth was generated I'm so good at
see I think women use wealth as a marker
of sexual attractiveness not because
they're interested in wealth but because
wealth is the best single predictor of
the ability to generate wealth and the
Potlatch is that kind of manifestation
it's like yes I have all this stuff I
can give it away and burn it and I can
make it again because it isn't the
wealth it's the capacity to generate the
wealth right it's a process or a spirit
you could say if you wanted to get
metaphorical about it so there's this
remarkable concordance between your work
and these these works that I've been
investigating like I said no one knows
the two literatures and so it's very
frustrating in a sense because I I
understood your concept of meme I would
say in exactly the way that you just
laid it out and I thought this is this
is exactly what I've been studying
there's these fundamental narratives and
the people who embodied them look the
heroes in in the theater they're actors
of a narrative meme they're obviously
Attractive people flock to watch them
they you know that among if you take
verites and you show them pictures of
the other vervet in their troops they
spontaneously gaze longer at the higher
status verit right it's exact so imagine
this in the human society is you have
people who act out the appropriate meme
let's say which is something like a meta
strategy for dealing with predation it's
something like that you can approximate
that to a greater or lesser degree the
more you approximate that the higher you
are on the sexual
selection in the sexual selection
hierarchy and I think that's clear like
it's a bit more complicated than that
because women's seem to be the the
pornographic literature that women
prefer is both the capacity to stand up
against predation and maybe even to be a
predator but that has to be brought into
alliance with the ability to make a
intimate relationship and share so it's
like half monster
half Cooperative distributor Cooperative
generous distributor it's something like
that you can see that's a real knife's
Edge evolutionarily because you want
someone who can keep the real monsters
at Bay but if they're such a monster
that they don't share and aren't
generous and can't take their care of
their children they're just another
bloody Predator so Richard the baldwi
effect applied not so much just to the
mtic preference for people who stand up
for example but something like a dragon
the abstracted Predator is is there any
kind of bold when effect implication of
of this kind of I think there could be I
mean I I think it's it's an interesting
idea that that yungan archetypes could
be Baldwin IED um memes and perhaps the
uh the dragon could be one of those well
you have that terminology even the
Baldwin effect terminology but that
notion is implicit in his writings like
he he was struggling he also didn't
precisely understand sexual selection
let's say so the idea lurks implicitly
in his work there's never a statement
like that but you can see clear
indications of his struggling towards
something like a Baldwin effect
explanation
chaps I'm afraid that we are just about
out of time uh but we will be having a
secondary conversation on dailywire plus
which we'll be doing in just a moment so
people listening if they're interested
in more can go and find more there but
for at least this part of the
conversation hopefully we've landed on a
point of somewhat agreement between
Richard Dawkins and Jordan Peterson
which I think is a is a is is a pretty
um significant success I would say in
many ways well I think we also
established part of the reason that
there's a difference
like I do think that your temperamental
Tack and my temperamental tack are are
different they're gen different you know
are you more interested in things or
people would you
say because that's a fundamental
dimension of differ say in in terms of
Interest it I don't think I admit the
question really okay okay well the
reason I asked is because the proclivity
to prefer non-fiction which is more of a
masculine proclivity is associated with
a tilt of Interest towards the domain of
things rather than the domain of people
so I'm interested in in Eternal things
I'm interested in things that were true
before there were any humans and will be
true long after humans are extinct which
sort kind of lets out all symbolism and
metaphor and stuff like that maybe
depends on the Baldwin effect yes okay
thank you sir I'm I'm very happy that I
have theun to talk to you today and
thank you very much Alex for for hosting
this and for everybody who is watching
and listening as Alex pointed out we're
going to turn to the Daily wire side
right away and if you want to join us
for another 30 minutes of this
conversation then you'd be more than
welcome to do that um and so thank you
one way or another for your time and
attention today thank you to the film
crew here in Scottsdale for spending the
time and energy necessary to make this I
hope a raving success I certainly was
interested in the conversation and so um
thanks to you guys as well
[Music]